---
tags:
  - history
---

## Ignaz Semmelweis pioneered antiseptic policies for physicians, but does that mean doctors of the time did not wash their hands at all or were they simply not rigorous enough with their hygiene?

One thing to mind is that physicians were not walking around with viscera dripping from their hands, scraping clumps of dried blood and tissue off their fingers before doing pelvic exams. There was an idea that cleanliness was admirable in personal, professional, and institutional practice. What constituted cleanliness in the 19th Century and its importance to medical practice, however, was a very far different thing from the aseptic practices of today. A doctor's hands might be "clean" after a toweling off following quick rinse in a basin used by numerous other doctors, students, patients, and visitors, but they certainly wouldn't be fit to perform surgery by any modern sense of medical sanitation.

The other thing to keep in mind is that Semmelweis was not alone in suggesting hygienic techniques as a means to prevent infections in general, and puerperal fever in particular. For instance, Thomas Watson, a London physician, recommended in 1842 a "diligent ablution" to avoid spreading infection. On the other side of the Atlantic, Oliver Wendall Holmes published ["The Contagiousness Of Puerperal Fever"](http://www.bartleby.com/38/5/1.html) in 1843 -- a year before Semmelweis graduated medical school -- in which, as the name suggests, he proposed a contagion model for puerperal fever. One of Holmes' suggestions to prevent puerperal fever specifically called on physicians who had done an autopsy to perform a "thorough ablution," change into clean clothes, and wait a full day before attending a birth.

It's unclear whether Semmelweis was specifically cognizant of these and other proto-aseptic techniques, but there was a general movement towards more hygienic medical practice at the time. The problem was that, prior to the development of germ theory in the late 19th Century, these exhortations for doctors to wash their hands and change had no firmer theoretical basis than any other idea about how to prevent disease. So a 1795 piece that Holmes actually cites as showing the contagious nature of puerperal fever, Gordon's [“A Treatise on the Epidemic Puerperal Fever of Aberdeen,”](https://archive.org/details/treatiseonepidem00gord) does advocate for doctors and midwives to wash their hands and clothes. It also, however, says that the cure for puerperal disease is bloodletting, since Gordon was still operating on a primarily Galenic model of bodily humors. A 1835 ["Practical Treatise on Midwifery"](https://archive.org/details/apracticaltreat03collgoog) took a different approach, stressing quarantine of sick patients, using fresh linens and burning the old, and using chlorine products to cleanse the clinic or home of the patient. Note these recommendations were focused on creating a clean environment, not a clean practitioner, because the treatise was working on the assumption that "miasmas" of foul odors caused disease.

So while Semmelweis was not the first to propose an infectious model of disease for puerperal fever, nor was he the first to advocate hand-washing and avoiding skipping directly from the autopsy table to the delivery room, he made a few key connections and implemented a few practices which have made him notable. Really, it was his absolute insistence that doctors and students vigorously scrub their hands not just with water, but with a solution of chlorinated lime, after every procedure and between each patient, that so dramatically brought down the maternal mortality rates at his Vienna and Pest hospitals.

It was, however, this same militant insistence, combined with his less than sterling personality, which led so many of his colleagues to reject both him and his practices. Such assiduous hand-washing with a chlorine solution seemed to them to be a waste of their time and an necessary expense. Particularly when there were so many other proposed etiologies for puerperal fever at the time, Semmelweis' singular fixation on vague "cadavaric particles" that needed to be scoured from the hands seemed ludicrous. He could not prove that the fever was not caused by any other other proposed causes considered at the time, such as pressure from the distended uterus, the general "puerperal state" of labor, a psychosomatic response to the mother's fear of death during childbearing, or even as a result of "injured female modesty" from the birthing process. The mortality numbers seem clear to a modern eye, but Semmelweis had no accepted model of proving that it was his chlorine scrubs, and not changes in any number of other other factors, which led to the decline in deaths. Therefore, a regular old rinsing of the hands would suffice.

Sources for all this:

- Adriaanse AH, Pel M, & Bleker OP 2000 Semmelweis: the combat against puerperal fever. Euro J ObGyn and Reprod Biol 90(2).
 - Alexander, JW 1985 The Contributions of Infection Control to a Century of Surgical Progress. Annals of Surgery 201(4).
- DeCosta CM 2002 "The contagiousness of childbed fever": a short history of puerperal sepsis and its treatment. Med J Australia 177(11-12)
- Gould, IM 2010 Alexander Gordon, puerperal sepsis, and modern theories of infection control—Semmelweis in perspective. Lancet Infectious Disease 10(4).
- Raju, TNK 1999 Ignác Semmelweis and the etiology of fetal and neonatal sepsis. J Perinatology 19(4).