
https://youtube.com/shorts/5ObdDdtZEzs?lc=UgyKvGwuF9Bu4QkFDet4AaABAg
> @bunnblebeerror9019 • 10d ago Re: Cleaning supplies. You can actually make pretty decent cleaners with some basic household stuff. Source: I used to work in a daycare and did the close-down cleaning, plus I have four dogs and a cat who don't always remember where they're supposed to go, and my mother smokes in the house. 1:9 bleach and water is about the only disinfectant you'll ever need. Just make sure to let it dry before little ones or animals go near and make sure to rinse it away with water before using any other cleaners. 1:1 vinegar and water makes a good deodorizer for cat pee especially, but it also works on animal stains and general stinkiness. 1tbs dish soap/quart of water makes a great all-purpose cleaner. Simple, the soap goes a long way, my go-to for wiping up the actual bulk mess before disinfecting or deodorizing. 1 tsp baking soda/quart of water makes a good deodorizing spray specifically for dog pee or other oily things. 1:3 rubbing alcohol to water for cigarette smoke. Spray onto fabric and open windows or leave items outside in the sun. As the alcohol evaporates, it takes the smoke smell with it. You can also use baking soda as a scrubbing agent, similar to Pink Stuff. Make a paste with it out of water and baking soda and use it to scrub your surface. You can also use baking soda OR vinegar OR bleach in mop water for similar results, be advised that bleach and vinegar both denature soap, and that bleach, vinegar, and baking soda shouldn't be mixed in any configuration. (Baking soda and vinegar is harmless, but also useless.) Basically, you just need a big supply of spray bottles, rags, sponges, and scrubbers and viola, you have a shitton of cleaning products for pretty damn cheap. Go forth. Clean for people <3 

tl;dr; diy cleaners:
- 1:9 bleach water

